---
title:  "About Path Graphs"
date:   2024-01-24 23:03:10 -0600
categories: causal-graphs
---
<div style="max-width: 92vw; margin: auto; padding-top: 1em;">
	<h1> Summary </h1>
	<p> Path Graphs is an application that models pathology as a causal graph. The benefits to this approach are that a) the student sees a concept map that they can rearrange to their desire, b) the student can interact with related concepts just by panning on the concept map, & c) the application can reason about the pathology that the student is learning to improve search results and to generate example test questions for students. </p>
	<h1> Causal Graphs as a Special Case of Concept Maps </h1>
	<p> The value of the concept map is already well-established in education. Pathology Graphs augments the traditional concept map with 2 new features: 1) Interactivity, and 2) Reasoning. Interactivity allows learners to freely explore physiology and related pathology, while reasoning enables learners to search for related topics and see the entire causal pathway relating the two topics. In order to support both these features, Pathology Graphs restricts the underlying representation of medical knowledge, storing only "causal paths". For example, rather than storing age as a risk factor for osteoporosis in women, a causal approach would identify "aging causes menopause", "menopause decreases serum estrogen concentration", and "estrogen promotes ostoblast activity" as 3 facts and connect them to derive the risk relationship between aging and osteoporosis in women.</p>
	<p> The underlying data structure that enables this derivation is known as a "graph". A graph is usually populated by two kinds of data: objects, and the connections between those objects. In the case of Pathology Graphs, the objects include (but are not limited to) molecules in biochemical pathways, observations on the physical exam, lab results, and patient sypmtoms. The connections are given, as discussed prior, by just the objects that are suspected to be mediating variables in a causal chain (e.g., "estrogen mediates the effect of menopause on bone density" corresponds to 2 connections between 3 objects: "menopause" -| "estrogen" & "estrogen" -> "bone density increase". Note the negative connection between menopause and estrogen.)</p>
	<h1> Why are Graphs Insufficient? </h1>
	<p> Despite its utility in storing causal data, the graph model discussed does not suffice to model the foundational biochemistry underlying physiology and pathophysiology. This inability is due to the fact that there are no higher order constructs in a graph model - only objects and connections. A chemical reaction where A and B make C cannot be faithfully represented by objects and connections because there is no way to model the collection of "A & B". </p>
	<h1> Typed Data & Reasoning </h1>
	<p> In order to overcome this basic hurdle, Pathology Graphs uses a typed database where custom types are defined to represent multi-participant connections such as chemical reactions. Pathology Graph's database schema defines molecules, reactions, and enzymes, enabling it to faithfully represent biochemical reactions. It also defines a "delta", an object representing a change to the system (e.g., inhibition of an enzyme). The schema defines inference rules for deltas, letting the application derive caused deltas.</p>
</div>
